---
title: "Using modelling and mapping for digital insights into diseases in the rice field"
collection: talks
type: "Talk"
permalink: /talks/2016-10-21-KSPP
venue: "2016 Korean Society of Plant Pathology Fall Meeting and International Conference"
date: 2016-10-21
location: "Pyeongchang, Gangwon-do, Korea"
---

Botanical epidemiology is the study of how plant pathogens and the diseases that they cause are affected by the environment and plant host. To study these interactions we often turn to models to help understand how diseases develop, what the potential risks might be and how they could be or when they should be controlled. Many different modelling approaches can be used, which range from statistical models to biophysical crop growth models with functions for yield losses due to pests and disease. Geographic information systems (GIS) help us to piece together information that have geographic relationships to develop better understanding and promote further inquiries through the use of maps. Using modelling alone or by linking it with a GIS we can extend our research to the field at different levels. In work with the [International Rice Research Institute (IRRI)](https://www.irri.org/), [we used the EPIRICE model to identify the effects of climate change on rice diseases in Tanzania to support breeders decide which disease to focus breeding efforts on](https://github.com/adamhsparks/MICCORDEA). The same model was used for mapping the levels of disease intensity for common diseases in India for breeders to understand where different stresses occur or co-occur. Using statistical analysis and network models with data collected from in-field surveys has yielded insights into the co-occurrence of pests and diseases, which were used to design pest and disease management program, RICE-PRE, which has been tested extensively throughout the Philippines and other southeast Asian countries. Lastly, the results of in-field and farmer surveys can used in a GIS to derive new insights into crop health issues in rice fields by mapping their occurrences. The [Philippine Rice Information System, PRiSM](https://www.riceinfo.ph/), is one such example of this where fields throughout the country are surveyed and information is recorded and presented back to the national department of agriculture for action to be taken. Using these combined approaches can help us as plant pathologists to understand and communicate what is happening in the rice field and what possible risks may be and make recommendations. These recommendations can range from identifying stress-prone areas for research priorities or targeted deployment of resistant or tolerant varieties to providing farmers with recommendations for pest management giving us insights into what is happening in the rice field.

[Download presentation here](http://adamhsparks.github.io/files/2016-10-21_Sparks_KSPP.pdf)
